Germany at the end of the nineteenth century was a
dynamic, powerful, and unstable country. It had
come into existence only thirty years earlier as the
result of a series of three victorious wars. Its government consisted of a combination of authoritarian
and democratic elements with the authoritarian
predominant. The head of state was the young and
unstable Kaiser Wilhelm II, who relied on the traditional Prussian military elite, the Junkers, to rule. Although the national legislature, the
Reichstag, was elected through universal manhood suffrage, it did not effectively share power with the emperor and his allies. The majority parties did not form the government. Instead, the kaiser chose ministers to
please himself. At the same time, Germany was industrializing rapidly,
making it one of the wealthiest nations in the world. That industrial
growth caused both domestic and foreign problems. At home, the expanding working class demanded a real share of wealth and power expressing its will through labor unions and the Social Democratic Party
(SPD). The rise of labor sparked fear among the ruling groups and the
middle class. The latter had not won a share of political power or social
standing commensurate with its economic position. Yet it was alarmed
by the growth of organized labor more than it resented its lack of influence and allied with and aped the traditional elites. The result was increasingly bitter social and political conflict as the twentieth century
dawned. Abroad, Germany attempted to assert itself as a world power,
leading to collisions with the other great powers, and especially with
Britain.

The advocates of free markets and small government were a distinct
and shrinking minority in turn-of-the-century Germany. Only the Liberal
People’s Party (Freisinnige Volkspartei) led by Eugen Richter advocated
ideas in the classical liberal tradition. Since the middle part of the nineteenth century the majority National Liberal Party had increasingly advocated policies that favored government intervention in the economy
and the formation of cartels. Indeed, there were very few people in Germany who would have been recognized as liberals by Adam Smith.
Rather, German economic thought was dominated by the Young Historical School, the “Kathedersozialisten” (socialists of the chair), which
advocated state manipulation of the economy both to increase the government’s power and to defuse social conflict. At the same time, the industrial sector increasingly organized itself into cartels that severely limited competition. Overall, imperial Germany in the years before World
War I was characterized by increasing social and political tensions, expanding state intervention in economic and social matters, private organization of the economy, and the search by both the government and
the opposition for new directions.

Ludwig Erhard was born into this unstable situation in the north
Bavarian city of Fürth, adjacent to Nuremberg, on 4 February 1897. But
he was remarkably unaffected by it. His father, Wilhelm, was the son of
a peasant family that had lived for generations in the north Franconian
village of Rannungen near Bad Kissingen. Born in 1859, Wilhelm Erhard
was part of that massive movement of people from the countryside to the
cities that played such an important role in changing German society
during this initial period of its industrialization. In 1885, at age twentysix, Wilhelm moved to Fürth seeking to improve his circumstances. However, unlike many of his contemporaries, rather than simply contenting
himself with a factory job, he established a business of his own. In 1888
he opened a clothing store in Fürth. In the same year, he married Augusta Hassold, the daughter of a family of master craftsmen, glass blowers and goldsmiths. Wilhelm Erhard’s business prospered. While by no
means wealthy, he became a member of the solid middle class that made
its living through hard work and satisfying the burgeoning consumer demand of the period, rather than by lobbying for government subsidies or
protection as many Junkers did to preserve their farms and many industrialists did to fend off foreign competitors.

These early years of Erhard’s life played a decisive role in shaping
his character and his political views. His father was a Catholic while his
mother was a Protestant. His tolerant, easygoing father allowed his
mother to raise Ludwig, his two brothers, and his sister, Rose, with whom
he became especially close, as Protestants. Wilhelm Erhard was an extrovert who was a follower of Eugen Richter and his small liberal party. The
elder Erhard relished debating his more conservative business associates
on issues of the day. Ludwig Erhard recalled these debates during the
1960s, a clear indication that his father’s liberal, small-business leanings
had profoundly and lastingly influenced him.
